@node User Preferences, Function Index, Reports, Top
@chapter User Preferences
@cindex User Preferences

@strong{This whole document is completely outdated. Don't read this. All
function names and every described structure has changed
completely. Only read this if you want to know how gnucash looked like
in 1999. This is completely outdated!}

The options system is used to obtain user preferences, both globally,
and when displaying a report. A wide variety of option types are
supported, so it should be possible to create an option for just about
any property the user might wish to specify.  New option types can be
added if necessary, but as the process requires detailed knowledge of
GnuCash internals and GTK+/GNOME, it is not documented here.

At present, users are most likely to come across the options system when
designing custom reports, and are consequently mostly going to use the
Scheme interface. There is also a C interface to much of the options
system which is used to access preferences for the UI, but it is not yet
documented.

@menu
* Option Databases::            
* Option Types::                
* Option Creation::             
* Option Values::               
@end menu

@node Option Databases, Option Types, User Preferences, User Preferences
@section Option Databases
@cindex Option Databases

The options for a particular report are placed in an @dfn{options
database}.  For doing a report, the option-generator function must
return an options database.  The function

@code{(gnc:new-option)}

returns a new, empty options database that you can then add options to.

Options are organised into sections, which are each given a title string
such as "Register" or "International".  The UI displays each section on
a seperate page.  Each section has a number of options.  Each option has
a name that uniquely identifies it in that section, and an alphabetic
@dfn{sort tag} that determines the relative ordering of the options for
display.

@node Option Types, Option Creation, Option Databases, User Preferences
@section Option Types

Sometimes, GnuCash requires the user to specify true/false properties.
Others properties most easily specified by selections from a list,
others from a number, others still by selecting dates, or one or more
accounts in the account hierachy, or even colors.  GnuCash supports all
of these and more:

@table @code

@item boolean

These are displayed as a checkbox by the UI.  They are used to specify
yes/no answers.

@item string

The UI provides a text entry box where arbitrary text may be entered.

@item font

This allows users to select fonts from those available on the system.

@item currency

For specifying a currency such as "USD", "AUD", "UKP" etc.

@item date

For specifying dates.  Depending on exactly what is required, you can
choose to let the user specify an @dfn{absolute} date, a @dfn{relative}
date such as "one month ago", or "start of the current accounting
period", or let the user choose how whether to specify the required date
in relative or absolute terms.

@item account-list

For selecting a particular account or accounts.  The UI displays a tree
of the account hierachy.

@item multichoice

For selecting one of a group of choices.

@item list

Similar to the multichoice option, but allows the selection of one
or more items from the group.

@item number-range

For specifying a numeric quantity.  The programmer can bound the range
and precision of the quantity.

@item pixmap

For selecting a pixmap located on the filesystem.

@item color

For selecting a color value.

@item internal

An option that isn't specified through an options dialog box.  For
instance, this is used to store the window dimensions so that they are
preserved along with other preferences.
@end table

@node Option Creation, Option Values, Option Types, User Preferences
@section Option Creation
@cindex Option Creation

To add an option to an options database, you first create that option,
then register it with the database.  For example, to create a simple
checkbox-style boolean option, you would use
@code{gnc:make-simple-boolean-option} to create the option.  Once
created, you can then register the option.  With
@code{gnc:register-option}.

@deffn Function gnc:register-option database option
Register @var{option} in options database @var{database}
@end deffn

The example below shows how to create an options database, then register
a boolean option with it:

@example
(define gnc:*hello-world-options* (gnc:new-options))
(gnc:register-option gnc:*hello-world-options*
     (gnc:make-simple-boolean-option
      "Hello, World!" "Boolean Option"
      "a" "This is a boolean option." #t))
@end example

@subsection Option Creation Functions

@deffn Function gnc:make-simple-boolean-option section name sort-tag documentation-string default-value

Creates a boolean option, with option section @var{section} and name
@var{name} specified as strings.  Note that the section and name strings
uniquely specify the option for the option database that they get
registered to, and are used for looking up the option when the value is
required.  @var{sort-tag} is a string tag that specifies the relative
order when displaying the options.  Options are displayed top to bottom
in case-sensitive alphabetical order.  @var{documentation-string} is a
string containing a short string describing the purpose of the option,
which the UI displays as a tooltip.  @var{default-value} should be a
boolean value indicating the default value of this option.

Note that @var{section}, @var{name}, @var{sort-tag}, and
@var{documentation-string} are common to all the following functions.
@end deffn

@deffn Function gnc:make-complex-boolean-option section name sort-tag documentation-string default-value setter-function-called-cb option-widget-changed-cb

As above, but the function specified in @var{option-widget-changed-cb}
is called when the GUI widget representing the option is changed (the
user clicks on the toggle button), and @var{setter-function-called-cb}
is called when the option's setter is called (when the user selects "OK"
or "Apply").

One use for having a non-false @var{option-widget-changed-cb} is to make
another option mutable (in concert with @code{gnc:option-set-sensitive},
discussed later).
@end deffn

@deffn Function gnc:make-string-option section name sort-tag documentation-string default-value

Make an option where the user can specify a string.  

@end deffn

@deffn Function gnc:make-date-option section name sort-tag documentation-string default-getter show-time subtype relative-date-list

Create a date option.  There are three different variations of date
options, specified by the variable @var{subtype}, which should be one of
@code{'relative}, @code{'absolute}, or @code{both}.  @code{absolute}
date options allow the selection of a specific day/month/year
combination.  @code{relative} date options allow the selection from a
list of different dates specified in relation to the current date, such
as "today", "start of the current month", or "six months ago".  Finally
@code{both} allows the user to choose either using absolute or relative
date options.
@end deffn
@var{default-getter} should be a @dfn{thunk} (Scheme function taking
no arguments) that returns a pair.  The car of the pair should contain
either @code{'relative} or @code{'absolute}, to indicate whether the
default value is relative or absolute.  If the car is @code{relative},
then the cdr should be a one of the relative date symbols listed in
@var{relative-date-list}.  If the car is @code{absolute}, it should be a
timepair containing the default date/time.

@var{show-time} is a boolean that indicates whether when selecting an
absolute date, the user can specify a time.  It is ignored if the
@var{subtype} is @code{relative}.

@var{relative-date-list} is a list of symbols that indicate the relative
dates permitted.  The symbols used must have been previously defined as
indicating a particular relative date.  @var{gnc:relative-dates}
contains a list of symbols that have already been set up for the most
common relative dates.  FIXME: document relative date system.

@deffn Function gnc:make-multichoice-option section name sort-tag documentation-string default-value value-list

Create a multichoice option.  @var{value-list} is a list of vectors of
length 3, each representing a different choice.  Each vector should
contain - in the following order:
@itemize
@item
A symbol identifying this choice.
@item
A string naming this choice - this string will be the main one
displayed.
@item
A string describing this choice slightly more fully.  This string will
appear as a tooltip.
@end itemize

@end deffn

@deffn Function gnc:make-list-option section name sort-key documentation-string default-values value-list

Like a multichoice option, but users can select one or more values from
a list.  @var{default-values} is a list of selected values instead of
just one.

@end deffn

@deffn Function gnc:make-font-option section name sort-tag documentation-string default-value

Allow the user to specify the font.  Font options store font descriptions as strings, 
like the X Logical Font Description.  You must provide a default value, as there is unfortunately
no easy way for the GUI to pick a default value.

@end deffn

@deffn Function gnc:make-color-option section name sort-key documentation-string default-value
scale use-alpha?

Allow the user to select a color.  The default value should be a list of
length 4 containing the red, green, blue, and alpha channel values for
the color.  The scale is the maximum value for a channel, and the
use-alpha? is a boolean that, if false, disregards the alpha channel
(note: if you don't know what an alpha channel is, you don't need it).

@end deffn

@deffn Function gnc:make-currency-option section name sort-tag documentation-string default-value

Let the user specify a currency using a currency code.  The GUI provides a specialised widget
for currency selection.

@end deffn

@deffn Function gnc:make-account-list-option section name sort-tag documentation-string default-getter value-validator multiple-selection 
@end deffn

@deffn Function gnc:make-internal-option section name sort-key documentation-string default-value
Create an option that isn't controlled through the options GUI.  This is
used mainly by the GUI to store state that should be preserved from 
session to session but isn't really configurable from a dialog box, 
such as the size of the GnuCash main window.  
@end deffn

@deffn Function gnc:make-number-range-option section name sort-tag documentation-string default-value lower-bound upper-bound num-decimals step-size

Create an option for selecting a numerical quantity.  lower-bound and upper-bound specify the domain of acceptable figures, and num-decimals specifies the range
to which the option will be displayed (FIXME:and rounded to?).  Step-size specifies the step size for the UI's up/down buttons.

@end deffn

@node Option Values,  , Option Creation, User Preferences
@section Option Values
@cindex Option Values

To get the value of an option, you must first lookup the option in
the options database.

@deffn Function gnc:lookup-option options section name

Looks up the option in section @var{section} and name @var{name} in the
options database @var{options}.

@end deffn


Once you have looked up the option, you can get its value using
the function @code{gnc:option-value}.

@deffn Function gnc:option-value option

Get the value of an option.  Option values returned are of the same
type as how the default values are specified (except the date option
which needs to be fixed).

@end deffn
